# Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services National Plan & Provider Enumeration National Provider Identifier Registry

This monthly file from CMS contains location information of licensed health professionals in the United States.


## Questions this dataset could help answer

* Where are all United States active dentists located?
* How many dentists are endodontists?
* Where are the practicing dental public health dentists in California?

## Utility

The NPI registry is comprehensive: all active dentists should be on the list. Since providers are able to list many possible specialties, the dataset could help us learn access points for many dental specialties.

## Data Stewardship  

The monthly raw NPI file is available for download from the CMS NPPES [website](https://download.cms.gov/nppes/NPI_Files.html). It's more than 4  gigabytes and won't open in Excel, so using statistical software is recommended.

#### Data Use

The NPI monthly file is available for free public download. No data use agreement is required. 

## Original Data Structure

Each row in the NPI monthly file is a unique provider with a unique NPI number. There are many columns for identification and addresses. To keep each row unique to a provider in the case when providers list multiple specialties, these specialties are each listed as one of the 13 "Healthcare Provider Taxonomy Code" columns. 

## Converted Data Structure

For the National Oral Health Data portal project, the large monthly file has been filtered to include only dental providers. It has been separated into two files:

* **NPI_geocoded**. Each row is a unique  NPI number. Latitudes and Longitudes have been added after geocoding based on the practice location field.

* **NPI_dental_specialties.csv**. Each row is a unique NPI-specialty pair. If a dentist identified as a 'general dentist', a 'pediatric dentist', and an 'endodontist,' in the monthly file, then they will appear on three rows in this file. 

The dental specialties were decoded using the following key:
This table is generated by unpivoting all the provider taxonomy columns in the flat file into one specialty code column, which is then joined to a separate csv we have of all the dentist-specific taxonomy codes. There are 13 such codes:

|code | description |
| ------- | ------------|
| 122300000X	| Dentist |
| 1223D0001X	| Dental Public Health |
| 1223D0004X	| Dentist Anesthesiologist|
| 1223E0200X	| Endodontics |
| 1223G0001X	| General Practice |
| 1223P0106X	| Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology |
| 1223P0221X	| Pediatric Dentistry |
| 1223P0300X	| Periodontics |
| 1223P0700X	| Prosthodontics |
| 1223S0112X	| Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery |
| 1223X0008X	| Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology |
| 1223X0400X	| Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics |
| 1223X2210X	| Orofacial Pain |



### Location Accuracy

It's not clear how often provider practice location information in the NPI file is updated. If not updated frequently, providers may not still be practicing where they are listed. Also, providers may practice in multiple locations but the NPI file only includes one primary practice location.

### Specialty Accuracy

Providers self-identify their specialty in the NPI file. Dentists may identify as up to 13 specialties at once. They may or may not be board certified in these specialties.

## Code

The R code used to download, modify, geocode, and save the dataset for this project is available in this [Github repository folder](https://github.com/PositiveSumData/NationalOralHealthDataPortal/blob/master/Data/NPPES_NPI_registry/NPI_r_code.R). 

In this code, a third spreadsheet -- **state.fips.csv** is joined to these used to convert state abbreviations to full state names.

## Tableau Presentation

The presentation is located on [Tableau Public]https://public.tableau.com/profile/association.of.state.territorial.dental.directors#!/vizhome/NPPESNPIRegistry/Orientation).

## Project status & Next Steps

The type of NPI (type I = individuals or type II = organizations) hasn't yet been broken out in this project, so that would be a good next step.

